Globalization in the Reinhardt Template Language
============================

This document explains the globalization features of the Reinhardt template system.

**Table of Contents**

- [Globalization Features](#globalization-features)
  - [Translatable Templates](#translatable-templates)
  - [Performing Translation](#performing-translation)
  - [Customizing Templates Per Locale](#customizing-templates-per-locale)
  - [Globalized Filters](#globalized-filters)
- [Preparing Your Templates for Translation](#preparing-templates-for-translation)
  - [Disjointed Phrases](#disjointed-phrases)
  - [Linguistic Context](#linguistic-context)
  - [Translating Text Embedded in HTML Attributes](#translating-html-attributes)
  - [Translating Text With Embedded HTML Tags](#translating-embedded-html-tags)
- [Remaining I18N Problems in Reinhardt](#remaining-i18n-problems-in-reinhardt)
 

Globalization Features
=============

Many web sites need to support multiple locales. For Reinhardt templates, this means
a few things. First, the text on the site needs to be translatable. Second, the
Reinhardt framework should support rendering the templates with translations of
that text when available. Third, the templates should be able to present the user
different user interfaces depending on the locale. Fourth, filters should operate
in a locale-sensitive manner as well.

Translatable Templates
----------------------

Taking these one at a time, let's start with the translatability of the templates.
Reinhardt now supports two Django-like tags that mark text as translatable: the
``trans`` and the ``blocktrans`` tags. Here is an example of using a ``trans`` tag:

     <title>{% trans "My Awesome Web Application" %}</title>

The parameter of the ``trans`` tag should be a quoted source string written in the
source language of the template.

N.B. The templates should be encoded in UTF-8 for Reinhardt to work properly.

The ``blocktrans`` tag is like a block tag, but its contents are translated. It is
used like this:

    {% blocktrans %}
    Hello {{ username }},<p>
    My Awesome Web Application is the leading SaaS solution
    for hosting your web applications written with RingoJS.
    </div>
    {% endblocktrans %}

Everything between the ``blocktrans`` and ``endblocktrans`` tags will be translated.
Please note that you cannot place other tags inside of a ``blocktrans`` block.
If you do, Reinhardt will throw an exception. However, as you can see above,
you can place variables inside of the ``blocktrans`` source string, which will
get replaced after the text is translated to the target language. The reason
it is replaced afterwards is because the position of the variable[s] within
the string may change in the translation.

Performing Translation
----------------------

The Reinhardt environment needs to be set up for translation, otherwise it
defaults to using the text that is in already in the template. To set it up
for translation, you must pass in a resource bundle factory that knows how
to generate new resource bundles for a locale. A resource bundle is exactly
what it sounds like -- a bundle of strings that map from the source string
or key to the translations. The interface to the resource bundle
that Reinhardt expects is very simple:

    var ResourceBundle = function(locale) { ... }
    ResourceBundle.prototype.translate = function(source, key) { ... }

That is, the constructor should load the translations (however it does that)
and the translate method should return the translation for individual strings.
Most strings will only have a source string, and the key will be undefined,
because the source string already uniquely identifies the string.
However, there is a way to
explicitly specify a unique key for a string to distinguish it from other
strings where the source is exactly the same, but which is used differently
in in different contexts. (See below for more information on that.)

You may use whatever translation package you want to implement this
interface. Popular packages include ilib, i18n.js, or translate.js just to
name a few. You do not have to re-invent the wheel for this, just pick
a wheel that you think is nice and shiny and go with it.

To set up a Reinhardt environment for translation, you should do something
like this:

    var env = new Environment({
        i18n: {
            resBundleFactory: function(locale) {
                if (!this.cache) {
                    this.cache = {};
                }
                if (!this.cache[locale]) {
                    this.cache[locale] = new ResourceBundle(locale);
                }
                // resources are immutable, so we don't have to worry about sharing them
                // amongst sessions and threads
                return this.cache[locale];
            },
            defaultLocale: "en-US"
        }
    });

This sets up the resource bundle factory to hand out new resource bundles for a locale
when necessary. The example above also includes simple caching so that we don't have
to reload the bundle every time. The environment needs a factory because each request
that comes in may have a different locale, depending on the user making the request.

That is almost everything you need to set up.

The only thing left to discuss is how you render the response. Each request may come from
a different user and therefore may have a different locale. The locale should be passed
in to the rendering routines using the render context. Reinhardt can then use this
locale to ask the resource bundle factory for a resource bundle for that locale, and
then ask that resource bundle for translations to the strings it finds in the ``trans``
and ``blocktrans`` tags. If no locale is given in the context, Reinhardt will use the
default locale (if it is set up) or it will default to the text that is already in
the templates.

Here is an example of a route using stick that passes the locale in to Reinhardt
in the render context:

    app.get('/:page', function(request, page) {
        return env.renderResponse(page, {
            locale: request.session.data.locale
        });
    });

If you use RingoJS's stick package, you can use the  ``locale`` middleware to
set up the session variable ``request.session.data.locale`` automatically. You can
also insert the user's locale into the session yourself when the user logs in based
on their personal locale preference as saved in their user record in the data store.

Customizing Templates Per Locale
--------------------------------

Third, we might need on occasion to customize templates per locale. For example, a dialog
that asks a user to enter information about a contact entry should have different fields
depending on the locale. In Japan, you would add a phonetic name field to the regular list
of fields so that
the user can tell you how the contact's family name is pronounced, and therefore how
it sorts in the list of contacts. In France, you would have a CEDEX field in the set
of address fields which will allow the user to add their contact's CEDEX information.
(The CEDEX is a key which tells the main post office of big cities in France which
sattelite office to send the mail to for sorting and delivery.)

Because you have to put the locale setting into the context in order to do translation,
this setting is also available to use in conditional statements. Here is
an example:

    {% if locale = "de-DE" %}
        {% include "germandialog.html" %}
    {% elif locale = "fr-FR" %}
        {% include "germandialog.html" %}
    {% else %}
        {% include "englishdialog.html" %}
    {% endif %}


Globalized Filters
------------------

Currently, Reinhardt does not have any dependencies on other libraries that can
give it the ability to do properly globalized filtering. As such, the filters that come
with Reinhardt currently only support English/Western European behaviours. This may be fine
for many sites, but if you need to support other locales, be careful when using
the built-in filters. You might look for Ringo packages on RP that implement
locale-sensitive filter plugins or implement some for yourself.

Preparing Your Templates for Translation
=====================

Here are a few things to think about when preparing your templates for translation.

Disjointed Phrases
------------------

In general, you should attempt to surround entire ideas or sentences with a
``trans`` or ``blocktrans`` tag because you will get the best translations that way.
Disjointed phrases are difficult to translate because
they can cause grammatical problems like plurality, case, or gender
agreement between those disjointed parts.

That means the following example is bad:

    {% trans "There are " %} {{ numberOfItems }} {% trans " items in your basket." %}

This is bad because the translator will see the phrase "There are " in their
queue of strings to translate, and they don't know how to translate it
properly. There are what? What does that mean? The correct translation in some languages
depends on exactly what the items are that are being referenced.

Using a whole sentence would make the string more self-contextual and therefore
much easier to translate. Better would be:

    {% trans "There are {{ numberOfItems }} items in your basket." %}

This also allows the translator to move the replacement variable around in the
translated string to where-ever it needs to be so that it is grammatically
correct in the target language.

Linguistic Context
------------------

Sometimes you might run in to the situation where there are two strings that are
exactly the same, but which are used differently and therefore translated
differently.

For example, suppose a button label has the single English word "free" on it.
The English word "free" has two meanings: "no cost" and "available
at that time". In English, we happen to use the same word for both of them.
In German or French for example, there are two different words for those
meanings, so you cannot share one translation of "free" for your
button labels. We need a way to communicate to the translator which meaning
we are using. You can do that with translator's comments:

    {% trans "Free" comment "Used in the store app to mean no cost." %}

In this example, the translator will know which meaning of the word "free"
is intended here and can pick the correct translation. The ``trans`` and
 ``blocktrans``  tags both ignore the comments and that text does not appear
anywhere in the rendered output. It is intended to be picked up by
localization tools that automatically extract translatable text from the
template and include it along with the source string in the batch of strings
to send to the translators.

In general, the more information you give to the translators, the better
the translation you will get back. You should sprinkle comment arguments liberally around your
``trans`` and ``blocktrans`` tags to help them out when-ever you feel a string
is possibly ambiguous. This is most important with short strings like
labels where the ambiguity is highest. Believe me, your translators will thank you!

What if you run into the situation where both meanings of the word are
used in the same app? In this case, you need some way of distinguishing between
the usages. You can use the "key" parameter to the ``trans`` and  ``blocktrans``
tags to uniquely identify usages of the string. Example:

    <label for="free_app_button">{% trans "Free" key "free_apps"
    comment "Used in the store app to mean no cost." %}</label>
    ...
    <label for="find_availability_button">{% trans "Free" key "available_times"
    comment "Used in the calendar app to find times when the user has no other meetings." %}</label>

In this situation, the render code will call the translate method of your
resource bundle with both the source string and the unique key.

Translating Text Embedded in HTML Attributes
-----------------------------------

Sometimes, you will find text inside of an HTML attribute value that is inside
of other text to translate. Here is an example:

    {% blocktrans %}
    <div class="header">Queue Limit Reached</div>
    <div class="bodytext">There are too many items in the queue, and no more may
    be added. If you would like to configure the queue limit, go to the
    <a href="admin.html" title="The admin page is only available to admin users">admin
    page</a> to change it.
    {% endblocktrans %}

Notice the ``title`` attribute of the ``a`` tag contains English text that also needs to be
translated? It would be nice if the attribute values were translated separately from
the main text of the block so as not to confuse the translators. These types of cases
should be handled using a separate ``trans`` tag that puts its value into a variable. You
can then use that variable inside the ``blocktrans``. Example:

    {% trans "The admin page is only available to admin users" as admin_tool_tip %}
    {% blocktrans %}
    <div class="header">Queue Limit Reached</div>
    <div class="bodytext">There are too many items in the queue, and no more may
    be added. If you would like to configure the queue limit, go to the
    <a href="admin.html" title="{{ admin_tool_tip }}">admin page</a> to change it.
    {% endblocktrans %}

The first ``trans`` tag will not generate any output when it is rendered. Instead, it
will store the translated results in the ``admin_tool_tip`` variable. Inside the
``blocktrans`` string, the ``admin_tool_tip`` variable will get substituted with the
translation from the ``trans`` tag. Reinhardt will request two separate translations
from the resource bundle and do the right thing with it.

Translating Text With Embedded HTML Tags
-------------------------

Remember that translators are professional linguists, not web developers, so they are
more concerned with linguistic grammar and syntax than they are with HTML grammar and
syntax. That means that a high chance of doing something incorrect like changing or
translating HTML that shouldn't be touched or leaving out a quote or angle-bracket
character. In general, you should minimize the amount of HTML elements included
inside of translated strings to reduce the translation problems you might end up
with later.

Translators are familiar with the following HTML tags and do the right thing
with them: a, p, b, i, br, and span. Those are tags which often appear within a
whole source sentences and are often included inside of source strings. Most other
tags occur between sentences and you should attempt to place the text between
them in separate ``trans`` or ``blocktrans`` tags.

    Bad (all one blocktrans):
    {% blocktrans %}
    <div id="foobar" class="header row left largebox" x-custom-attr="More text">
        This is text inside of a div tag.
    </div>
    <div id="foobar2" class="header row left largebox">
        This is a separate div with a different sentence in it.
    </div>
    {% endblocktrans %}

    Good (separate trans tags):
    <div id="foobar" class="header row left largebox" x-custom-attr="{% trans 'More text' %}">
        {% trans "This is text inside of a div tag." %}
    </div>
    <div id="foobar2" class="header row left largebox">
        {% trans "This is a separate div with a different sentence in it." %}
    </div>

The "Good" example does not have any confusing HTML in the strings, increasing the
liklihood that you will get good translations back from the translators.


Remaining I18N Problems in Reinhardt
------------------

Just so that you are aware when you use them, the following filters perform
functions that are locale-sensitive, but for which Reinhardt currently only follows the
English or Western European conventions:

* dates and date/time formatting, arrays.sortByKey, logic.yesno, strings.capfirst, 
strings.lower, strings.upper, strings.title, strings.floatformat, strings.ljust, 
strings.truncatewords, strings.wordcount, strings.wordwrap, strings.truncatechars
